good afternoon and welcome back to
Downing Street for the daily coronavirus
briefing I'm joined by the chief nursing
officer Ruth Mae and the deputy chief
medical officer Jonathan van tan our
plan is to protect life and to protect
the NHS both by slowing the spread of
this virus to flatten the curve and by
ensuring that the NHS always has more
capacity to provide the critical care
for those in need now this is a national
effort and every single person in this
country can play their part in this plan
this Easter will be another test of the
nation's resolve it's a time of year
when people normally come together but
however warm the weather however
tempting your local beach or Park we
need everyone to stay at home because in
hospitals across the country
NHS staff are battling day and night to
keep desperately sick people breathing
and they need you to stay at home I'm
very happy to report that the Prime
Minister's condition continues to
improve he wants to personally thank the
whole clinical team at San Thomas's for
the incredible care that he's received
his thoughts are with all of those who
have been affected by this terrible
disease the NHS is there for all of us
in this country and I know our amazing
NHS staff have given the Prime Minister
the very best care possible in the same
way that they would give every single
person in this country the very best
care possible one of the things that
makes me proud of this country is that
it doesn't matter who you are the NHS is
always there to care for you before
updating you on our plan I want to share
the latest data
the ongoing monitoring and testing
program yesterday I'm glad to report
that 19,000 116 tests were carried out
across Great Britain 7706 tested
positive the number of people currently
in hospital with coronavirus symptoms is
19,000 304 of those who've contracted
the virus
8950 eight have sadly died an increase
of 980 since yesterday we never forget
that behind this number behind each one
is a name a loss and a family that will
never be the same again and we all share
a responsibility to tackle this virus
first and foremost by staying at home
now earlier this month I outlined our
five pillar testing strategy and I'm
glad to report a very positive response
to setting out the goal of a hundred
thousand tests a day by the end of the
month I can announce today that we have
capacity for all key social care staff
and NHS staff who need to be tested to
get those tests to deliver this in
addition to the testing being done in
NHS hospitals we've now opened 15
drive-through testing centers including
in Glasgow Cardiff Belfast Nottingham
Plymouth Leeds and London and other
places the UK life sciences industry is
also answering our call to arms
yesterday I opened our first of our
three lighthouse mega labs in Milton
Keynes two more are on track in Cheshire
and in Glasgow and AstraZeneca and GSK
two of the biggest pharmaceutical
companies in the world are opening
another in Cambridge and I want to thank
the team and all the volunteers who are
working night and day to make this
happen today I want to address what
we're doing to make sure that we have
enough PPE protective equipment and to
make sure that it gets to the right
people the goal I've set is that
everyone working in a
critical role must get the PPE that they
need NHS and care staff protect us every
day while we're safe at home they go off
to work to care for us we owe it to them
to get them the kit they need to protect
themselves I want to be frank about the
challenges our plan is designed to
overcome first there is a huge
international demand for PPE and a
global squeeze on supply compounding
this some countries have placed export
bans and other restrictions on PPE as
they look to secure their domestic needs
next there's high demand for PPE from
within the UK so everyone should use
this equipment use the equipment they
clinically need in line with the
guidelines no more and no less then of
course there's the challenge of
distribution the sheer quantity and type
of PPE needed has radically changed
because of coronavirus many parts of the
NHS and social care have never had to
rely on weekly PPE deliveries before in
normal times the NHS supply chain for
protective equipment supplies 233
hospital trusts right now 58,000
separate health and care providers need
PPE so we've had to create a whole new
logistics network essentially from
scratch all of these change challenges
around supply around usage and
distribution are being overcome and I
want to take a moment to set out in
detail how today we're publishing our
PPE plan it has three strands strand one
is about guidance being clear who needs
PPE when they need it and who does not
there's enough PPE to go around but only
if it's used in line with our guidance
we need everyone to treat PPE like the
precious resource that it is that means
only using it when there's a clinical
need and not using more than is needed
last week following extensive
consultation with the medical colleges
all four
UK government's published updated
guidance for what PPE to use in what
circumstances the new guidance included
the clinical advice that many items of
PPE can be used for a whole session not
be changed after treating each
individual patient everyone is still
protected but there's enough PPE to go
around
the guidance is also clear where PPE is
not needed because outside of health and
social care in most circumstances the
best way to protect yourself and to
protect others is to regularly wash your
hands and wherever possible to keep at
least 2 metres between you and other
people when you leave your house and of
course the most important way to protect
yourself is to stay at home because a
front door is better than any face mask
the second strand of our PPE plan is
about distribution making sure that
anyone who needs PP you can get it and
at the right time this is a Herculean
logistical effort we've brought together
the NHS private industry and the army in
fact the Armed Forces to create a giant
PP distribution network on an
unprecedented scale
that network is now delivering daily to
our frontline heroes quite literally
since the start of the outbreak we've
now delivered over for over seven
hundred and forty two million pieces of
PPE to the frontline this includes a
hundred and sixty 1 million masks a
hundred and twenty seven million aprons
a million gowns and 345 million pairs of
gloves these have reached hospitals
ambulance trust GP settings social care
hospices and community pharmacies we've
also set up a 24/7 hotline for any
providers experiencing supply problems
and crucially every NHS hospital has
received a delivery of critical PPE once
every 72 hours and over the next week
we're making that daily this week we've
arranged a priority drop of 30 million
items of PPE
to the local resilience forums the ELA
refs are in turn delivering to social
care and others according to local need
and in the coming weeks we'll be scaling
up our PPE delivery systems still
further I can announce that over the
next three weeks we're rolling out an
online portal allowing primary care and
social care a system so that they can
request PPE from a central inventory and
this will mean that we can track demand
in real time and deliver according to
need this Herculean effort of enormous
operational complexity to get the right
piece of equipment to the right person
at the right moment I pay tribute to the
enormous efforts of all those who are
making it happen we will do everything
we possibly can to keep improving this
but I want to take a moment also to say
thank you to all those involved the
third strand is about the future supply
which is making sure that we've got
enough PPE to see us through the crisis
we're using up PPE on an unprecedented
scale so we're constantly buying more
from abroad and now making it at home
our PPE sourcing unit is securing new
supply lines from across the world
ensuring that we but what we buy meets
rigorous standards and this include team
from the foreign office the depart for
international trade out in the Far East
especially buying directly from
manufacturers and teams in Whitehall
focused on rapid freight operations to
get it here we've published the
standards that will buy against along
with our global shopping list it and
it's also about ramping up domestic
production as well going into the crisis
we did not have a major domestic PPE
manufacturing industry so like with
ventilators and with testing we're
creating what many businesses have
generously come forward with offers to
turn over their production lines as part
of this national effort in particular
the I want to thank Burberry with their
offers of gowns rolls-royce and McLaren
who are creating visors in EOS and
Diageo who are producing hand sanitizer
we're talking to many others and we want
more to step up to the plate so if
you've got production facilities and you
can meet our published technical
specifications we want to hear from you
so that we can make this kit here in
Britain that'll keep people safe this is
our comprehensive PPE plan to protect
the people who protect us to make sure
they have the kit they need to do their
job safely and with confidence but I
want to finish by saying this even if
you're not directly involved in the NHS
in the PPE supply chain and testing or
as a key worker there is something that
every one of us can do to play your part
in the national effort stay at home
because spreading the virus today risks
lives tomorrow and it increases pressure
on those who work in the NHS do it for
them do it for the people who you love
the more we all follow the rules the
faster we can lift these restrictions
and get back towards normal life thank
you to all those of you who are already
doing your bit as part of our national
effort stay well stay at home protect
the NHS and save lives I'm now going to
hand over to chief nursing officer Ruth
Mae thank you very much secretary of
state first I'd like to offer my
personal wishes to the prime minister in
his speedy recovery
but this bank holiday is like no other
that I can remember at Easter we're
normally looking forward to catching up
with friends seeing our families from
across our country but at the moment
we're asking you to stay home it's not
possible to do that
this year and I know that is difficult
staying at home is saving lives the
actions that you take this weekend will
have consequences by staying at home you
will help us I want you to remember
the sacrifices that others are making
the nurses the doctors the physios HTA's
the countless many others are not at
home this weekend because they're
working in our hospital in my social
care setting saving patients lives I
want to offer my sincere thanks to each
and every one of our NHS and social care
staff for what you are doing around the
clock and I also want to offer my thanks
on behalf of the NHS staff to all of
those key workers who have allowed us to
keep working teachers childcare
supermarket workers and others you are
helping me stay at work and others stay
at work like me you may have seen some
TV coverage this week about what's
happening in our hospitals dedicated
skilled professional NHS staff calmly
dealing with the mounting numbers of
patients with coronavirus they are frank
about the toll that takes both physical
and emotional
and of course nurses health care
assistants midwives and other NHS staff
are now among the victims of this
coronavirus some have lost their lives
the loss of our own however they have
contracted the virus is heartbreaking
the NHS is a family and we feel their
loss deeply I'd like to offer my sincere
condolences to the family the friends
and the colleagues of every member of
NHS staff who have died in the recent
weeks every single person in this
country can help our nurses and our NHS
staff you can keep yourselves and others
safe and out of our hospitals by staying
home we freed up more than thirty
thousand beds the equivalent of 50
district general hospitals in the past
few weeks and that's before opening the
extraordinary NHS Nightingale Hospital
in Lynn
London and I'm a pleased to announce
today that alongside the new hospitals
in Birmingham Manchester Harrogate and
Bristol I can confirm that Sunderland
and Exeter will soon seed Nightingale
hospitals in their communities to these
extra hospitals if we need them
we'll be part of the NHS's nationwide
response to coronavirus the greatest
health care challenged the NHS ever
faced
and I'm plowed a continual tradition
dating back to the founding of our NHS
72 years ago nurses are at the heartbeat
of this people's Health Service these
are difficult days but amid this dark
news that each day brings my colleagues
are sustained by the extraordinary shows
of support for the NHS that has been
received from our public the rainbows
the NHS signs in the window lifts me and
they lift my colleagues I'd never
thought to see people across this
country
clapping and showing your thanks every
Thursday it means a great deal to me and
my colleagues move that I can say but
there is one thing there is no doubt
that the single greatest thing you can
do to say thank you to our NHS and
social care staff is for people to
follow the advice this is a long weekend
we need you to stay at home and stay
safe thank you
oh now ask professor van tan to take us
through the slides and the data that we
publish every day Thank You Secretary of
State
may I have the next slide please okay so
you'll recall that one week ago I
presented some data to you on transport
use and how that had changed over time
as the public had followed our social
distancing advice and I'm pleased to
report to you today you can see on the
slide that in the week that has passed
since I last stood at this podium the
trend has continued that use of various
forms of public transport have all
stayed at low levels I can't tell you
how important it is that you just keep
going with this this is not over when I
move on to the next slide you'll see
it's not over we have to keep pushing as
a nation to maintain our social
distancing we have to take the pain now
to make the gain in a few weeks time
next slide please
so this is a slide which shows you from
the 16th of march on the left through to
the 10th of April on the right new UK
cases and these are best based on the
day on which the laboratory test was
completed so of course there is a little
variation there between when the test
was taken and the test was completed but
nevertheless you can easily see the
broad trend that we have been in an
increase phase and now we are at a point
where we're at a high level and the
numbers are varying day by day but
they're at this high level we are in a
dangerous phase still and I need to
reinforce that again to you that this is
not over next slide please
if you look at people diagnosed with
kovin 19 who are now occupying hospital
beds in Great Britain you can see that
again over the period of the slide from
20th of March through to the 9th of
April there has been a steady increase
but possibly you can see that the curve
is bending it's impossible to say that
we have peaked London has gone down in
the last day but the Northeast and
Yorkshire have gone up however I suggest
to you that the curve is beginning to
bend and that your hard work is
beginning to pay off
but again I say if this is just not over
it needs to continue next slide please
if you look at critical care you can the
slide talks for itself of the extent to
which London has been the epicenter of
our wave our first wave and you can see
that the other parts of Britain are at a
lower level but the trend overall is
pretty much the same that there has been
this sharp increase there may be some
signs that the curve is beginning to
bend but it's premature absolutely to
say that we're at a peak and the push
that we're making with social distancing
just has to continue I would add a
personal touch here and say that my
mother-in-law is a healthcare assistant
my two of my best friends one is a nurse
another one is an operating department
professional who's been repurposed to
high dependency to work on this crisis
this really matters and it really
matters that we keep going with it next
slide please
if you look at the global death
comparison on this slide again as last
week these are synchronized so that day
nought is the day at which each country
reported 50 deaths and you can see that
again there is this broad similar
trajectory across many countries that
report data with one or two outliers and
the UK continues to be broadly in line
with what is happening in other
countries it's still a dangerous
situation we have to keep taking
measures to bring this under control
thank you so much today thank you very
much so if we now go to questions the
first question we've got is from Q Pym
at the BBC thank you very much
Secretary of State you and other
ministers have said repeatedly in recent
weeks that you have plans to get protect
of equipment to the NHS and social clout
care health and care workers are saying
to us they are still struggling in some
cases to get that equipment they feel
unsafe aren't you now acknowledging that
previous plans were just not enough were
not sufficient no thanks what I'm
acknowledging is that this is an
enormous challenge a Herculean a
logistical effort we've so far delivered
742 million pieces of protective
equipment but it is a a task that needs
constant effort because of the 1.4
million people who work in the NHS and
the over 2 million people who work in
social care using PPE has gone from
being something that happens in a
relatively small way to right across the
board and and the critical thing is that
people use pee-peed like the precious
resource that it is and that we get the
PPE to them so that they can always have
what is clinically needed now of course
I'm I listen to the concerns that are
raised with me and what I can tell you
is that the team who are trying to
deliver on this have themselves put in
an enormous effort and we are getting
the PPE out there but there's clearly a
huge task ahead to keep it flowing and
to make sure that those who need it get
it I don't know if you Ruth wants the
sound of thing in terms of a report from
the frontline as a nurse user absolutely
so I know as a nurse that PPE is very
important for their safety but also the
feeling of being safe I know that I also
want to make sure that people are using
it and aware in it to the right level of
from the right environment and that's
really important but I also know and I
hear that it's a challenge it's a
struggle right now to making sure we've
got it everywhere we need it at the
right time and that is what the
Secretary of State
ready set out in his strategies being
launched today but making sure that the
government is doing just that and
collectively we're wanting to do it but
it's really important we're doing that I
know also I was yesterday and at the
London excel Nightingale hospital
receiving my refresher training about
how to put my PPE on and off and it's a
challenge it's tough wearing PPE so I
want to also recognize that for all of
our stuff right now thanks very much
as Seadrill Maria from ITV can I come
back I'm sure yes you sorry we'll go
back to Hugh come back to you see John
yep just very quickly I mean you've
published plans before and given
reassurances about protective equipment
there won't be there will be a lot of
skepticism weren't there still about
another plan being published I mean what
guarantees can you give that people will
be made to feel safe with the right
equipment yes well we have made progress
on PPE throughout this and I think what
you might be referring to in terms of
published what we published before was
last week making sure that we brought
clarity to what PPE is needed in what
settings this plan is about that but
it's also about how we then deliver with
details of how the supply chain works
and also crucially how British
manufacturers can step forward and
deliver to specifications that we've
published the technical details of so
that so that manufacturers can come
forward to replenish the stocks that
we've got and what I'd say is that it is
a constant effort to get the PPE to the
frontline a huge logistical effort and
we acknowledge the challenges of course
we do we face them every day and we are
doing everything in our power to get
that PPE to the frontline and those with
concerns about PPE at the frontline
we're making sure that they have a place
that they can go in order to to call for
help so it's a it's a it's a detailed
plan set out in public both so that we
can encourage more suppliers to come and
add
to the replenish the stockpile but also
so that everybody can see and the the
challenges that there are and how we're
proposing to overcome them if we go to
see jail Maria now ITV Thank You
Secretary of State it's good news that
the Prime Minister's health is improving
does he accept those that he is unlikely
to be able to return to work soon and is
the government ready to take key
decisions such as whether the lockdown
will be extended in his absence and
given the Republic of Ireland just
announced their lockdown will continue
until the 5th of May shouldn't you level
with everyone that we are heading for a
much longer than a three week lockdown -
well the the Prime Minister is
recovering and I'm sure the whole nation
is delighted to see the news that he's
getting better and you know the fact
that he was so ill demonstrates once
again just how serious this disease is
and I'm I'm delighted about that and the
good news is that the government in his
absence has been functioning very
efficiently very effectively the foreign
secretary yesterday made clear that we
don't have enough information yet to be
able to make any changes to the - the
social distancing arrangements and that
save will meet next week and they will
look at the data then and the the the
way that we make that decision has been
set out very clearly and is is
functioning very well I think the
foreign secretary is doing an excellent
job in chairing the committee of that
that makes these decisions in the prime
minister's absence but that is within
the context of a strategy that the Prime
Minister very clearly set out and that
we're working through and we're able to
get on with the day to day things like
publishing today's PPE plan and do the
things that are needed whilst the prime
minister recovers
thanks very much then Kentish from LBC
thank you health secretary many people
around the country many LBC listeners
they're asking why the UK is continuing
to allow people to enter the country
from virus hotspots and planes to land
without the people on those planes even
being tested or asked to quarantine
isn't there a real risk that once we do
pass the peak all the efforts that we've
made to reduce the number of Teck cases
risk being undermined by people
continuing to enter the country
unchecked from other countries where the
number of cases is still much higher and
what measures will you put in place to
stop that and if I could just ask
professor van tan health secretary said
there that staying behind your front
door is better than any face mask but
other countries are not seeing it of
course is an either/or Germany this week
becoming the latest to say that face
masks would be a key part of their exit
strategy a key part of their plan to
tackle this virus the UK risks being a
becoming a bit of an outlier because the
government's position is that there's no
real benefit to those can I just ask
what evidence our decision has been
based on and why you think other
countries have taken such a different
approach if the science does say that
masks aren't particularly effective
thank you well the answer to both
questions Ben is the same which is that
we follow the science and we followed
the science in terms of international
travel all along and we saw right at the
start of this pandemic that the country
that brought in the two countries that
brought in the most draconian
international travel restrictions the
United States and Italy
both of them have have now got serious
problems themselves so I think that the
science which said that which we that we
followed on international travel has
been borne out by events on the second
question as well I'll hand over to
Professor van tan but I I just want to
absolutely underline the same point
which is that we follow the science and
the science on the use of face masks
says that it they are
that they don't have a material impact
outside of those settings which the
public health England have set out but
also here we are following the
international evidence to the World
Health Organization have themselves
looked into this very recently and came
to the conclusion that face masks should
be saved for those in health and care
who really need them so it is not a
risk-free option to have face masks for
everybody to wear face masks because
that means that it's harder to get hold
of face masks for the people where the
science says that they're needed
professor thank you thank you secretary
thank you been to your first point about
closing borders our scientists have been
very clear from the outset that that
would not work as a measure and to
prevent the ingress of coronavirus into
the UK coronavirus is now in the UK and
transmitting very widely I understand
the point you're making and I see where
you're coming from in terms of when we
get this under control doesn't that
change the situation but we won't go
from a position of widespread community
transmission amongst our own people to a
position of zero transmission under our
own amongst our own people which of
course was the case back in December
2019 we will likely go back to low
levels of transmission and the virus
will continue to be here in and around
us in our communities I suspect for a
very long time
even if we can keep the levels right
down so from that perspective I hope
that adds a bit of sense to the context
of the question around travel now in
terms of face masks and general wearing
of them by the public I do know that
this is a very vexed and very emotive
issue with citizens all around the world
Fran
clay and we have kept this under very
careful and repetitive scientific review
our expert Advisory Committee nerve tag
met again this week to consider all of
these matters and we do remain convinced
that there just isn't the evidence base
to support general mask-wearing use by
the public you've probably seen the
paper that was released four days ago on
bio our xiv by paul hunters team from
the university of east anglia they have
been through all of that evidence again
we have looked at all of that evidence
in that paper again and it remains the
case that we do not see at this point a
persuasive argument for general
mask-wearing by the public but i want to
assure you personally and of course you
know those who are listening in that we
will keep the science evidence under
review and we we are going to be guided
by the science and if the science
evidence changes then we will change
thanks very much
charlotte charlotte at talk radio Thank
You mr. Hancock and could I firstly ask
how many front line NHS workers have
died from catered 19 and secondly could
I ask when a health care worker does
pass away has there been some form of
investigatory process put in place so
that we can learn lessons from what
happens to them and make sure it doesn't
happen against their colleagues yes I
think this is a question for you Ruth
okay thank you very much we know that
any death for jutsu coronavirus is a
tragic one we also know that a death
over one of our workers one of our
family is for me heartbreaking we do
have numbers of people that have died
whether they're nurses midwives health
care assistants doctors it would be
inappropriate for me right now to go
into lists
and in numbering them because we haven't
got necessarily all of the position
across England with all of the people's
families given us the permission to talk
about them but I recognize that we will
I want I will want to make sure that we
are learning any lessons to be learnt
but it'd be inappropriate for me to
comment on any individual deaths that
we've seen whether that is one of our
health care workers or not thanks very
much
Charlotte Anna Michael over from The
Telegraph question for the health
secretary economists are an average
predicting that there's going to be a
14% drop in GDP in the second quarter of
this year and I understand some in
government say that it could be even
worse what would the impact of that be
on the numbers of deaths that are not
directly related to coronavirus this is
a really important question and one that
I worry about a lot and the goal that I
have as health secretary is to protect
life but you've got to make sure that
you look at that in the widest context
of course protecting people from deaths
you directly do - coronavirus that's
actually the subject of most of the
discussions of these press conferences
and a huge amount of effort to make sure
that the NHS capacity is there and the
second type of of mortality that we
protect against is deaths that occur
because the NHS is overrun and I'm very
pleased that thus far in this crisis
there is no point at which the NHS has
been overrun and every single person
with coronavirus has been able to access
the best possible care in the NHS
because we've taken the action to expand
the NHS sourced the ventilators and
increased capacity with the Nightingale
hospitals to make sure that there is
always the capacity there and that is
obviously absolutely top priority as we
repeat at the start
of each of these press conferences the
third type of impact is the impact due
to delaying NHS activity because we're
responding to coronavirus some of this
you have to delay because for instance
some treatments for cancer require you
to take immunity down to very low levels
which is a dangerous thing to do when
there's a very significant virus around
and then the fourth impact on mortality
that we consider is the economic impact
now we do not yet have a established
estimate of the impact of the huge
problems in the economy that have been
caused and that impact on itself back
onto the health of the nation but it's a
piece of work that I'm working on
jointly with the with the Chancellor to
make sure that we when we make decisions
about the the the big policy decisions
especially around social distancing we
take into account the entire impact on
the health and well-being of everyone in
the country not just on the highly
visible impact on the deaths from
coronavirus but right across the board
including indirectly through the
economic impact of the of the crisis so
it's something that I as a trained
economist I'm very alive too I work very
closely with Richie on it and it's
something that will be at the heart of
our judgments as we make those the
decisions in the future but what's clear
is that right now it is too early to
make those judgments and so the position
as of this weekend and the most
important message for everybody this
weekend is to stay at home because
that's what saves lives did that answer
the question well can I just quickly
follow up you say that work is ongoing I
understand if it is too early to tell
what exactly the economic impact will be
but it's been reported today that there
is existing government model
150,000 deaths of hundred that are
unrelated be unrelated to coronavirus
but because of all these other impacts
that you just listed
does that sound plausible to you as a
ballpark no I saw that figure in the
telegraph this morning but it's wrong
it's not part of our internal analysis
and when we do do that analysis and are
in a position that we've got confidence
in it then then I'm sure we'll be able
to answer the question more directly but
that 150,000 figure is not correct Tom
Newton done at the Sun thank you very
much health secretary question to the
chief nursing officer may 1st when you
all about you're driving around you see
people flagrantly disregarding social
distancing mucking around in parks
there'd been reports of hundreds of
house parties being broken up by the
police in Manchester how does that make
you feel personally after the very
emotive words you just said about your
service and the colleagues you've lost
and a question to the deputy CMO if I
might and obviously it's too early to
start talking about relaxing the
lockdown and restrictions because you
don't have the data set but when the
time does come for that in weeks in
advance maybe what are the sort of
numeric targets you would consider happy
for case loads in hospitals admissions
overall fatality rates whatever it might
be
what's the level have to get down to
before you're happy to advise the
government that it's now time to start
thinking about relaxing can you give the
British people some sort of target they
can look out for sometime in the future
obviously the person and professor van
Town to answer the second but just
before I do though I just want to
correct something in the premise of the
second question which is that it's not
that we don't yet have data it's that
the the information that we do have so
far shows that we're not there it's
because if you look at the curves whilst
they are flattening they're not
flattening far enough to be able to make
any change
and that's what sage will look at again
next week so just it's a it's an
important nuance in the in the way that
the question was put but I'll ask ask to
ask
jvt to answer it if you're happy with
that marginally reframed question
everything so Tom it's very very
frustrating it's personally frustrating
to see people clearly not doing social
distancing clearly coming out in large
groups I was only on the way here
going over Westminster Bridge seeing a
whole horde of cyclists coming together
it is enormous ly frustrating and the
reason that is frustrating is because
there's also still occasions where my
colleagues are getting abuse from their
neighbors for driving off to work so Sam
and nurse in a mental health
organization in East of England has
grief from her neighbours because she
was travelling to work our nurses our
health care staff need to be able to get
to work it's right and proper they do
but my ask of everybody please stay at
home save lives and protect my staff
thanks very much professor Thank You
secretary state so sir Tom thank you for
the question and I completely understand
that everyone wants a number or a figure
or something that they can say can I
look out for this will that then begin
to tell me that we're finally beating
this for real for good in this wave if
you see what I mean that advice
unfortunately is complicated it will
come from Sage from the scientific
advisory group for emergencies and it
will be based upon looking at the number
of tests that are positive that are
coming through the system it will be
based upon the number of new hospital
admissions with confirmed coronavirus it
will be based upon the number of people
going to ICU and the number of deaths
all of those indicators will need to be
taken into account to give us a prop
reliable picture that things are
definitely on the downturn and that we
feel constant confident that it is
consistently now the case and you've
seen on the figures I've shown today
with new cases you know the figures are
kind of bouncing around a bit and that's
entirely normal that is random variation
that you get with any biological
phenomenon any disease phenomenon
involving humans and much as I am you
know eating to give you one thing you
can go on and say this is the signal
that we're looking for then I just can't
it is just too soon and it is a more
complicated judgment than that based on
a number of indicators thank you very
much is that a sus fight on I completely
accept mr. van turns point can you which
case just to find what we mean what you
mean by the peak because obviously
there's weeks apart from Oscar missions
and cases two fatalities what exactly is
the peak and how do we know when the
peak is past right so um in terms of the
indicators I've given you this is a bit
this whole concept is a bit like a hose
pipe in your garden with a tap at one
end and when you turn that tap off water
still comes out the hose pipe for a few
seconds before it dies down and so it is
with the indicators here there are
people being infected with corona virus
today they will develop their symptoms
at some point over the next two weeks
regrettably some of them will become ill
enough to go into hospital possibly
about seven days after the onset of
their symptoms and then not all of them
will need intensive care thankfully only
a very small proportion but they won't
all need intensive care the moment
they're admitted to hospital some will
perhaps take a few days before that
happened
and that's a further delay and then
those that are unfortunately going to
succumb to this disease don't succumb
instantly and again that takes time for
those deaths to show from infections
that occurred maybe two weeks before
that and so from that perspective that
we we work all the time with these lag
periods and the peak of each of those
indices will be different and you do
need to have a composite understanding
of all of them and to be thoroughly
assured that this is now turning down
for good in this wave before you can
signal to the government that it's time
to think about what happens next on
social distancing okay thanks Tom Hanna
allotment
from the from buzzfeed hello how exactly
you're going to get from nineteen
thousand to a hundred thousand tests by
the end of the month if two of the three
mega laps that you set up won't be up
and running for another couple of weeks
and what will you do if you don't and
the question for Jonathan Burnham
doctors told us that they're being asked
to ration oxygen what are you doing to
ensure not just that the oxygen tanks
are full but hospitals have the capacity
to deliver those supplies to patients at
the rates that they need thanks very
much we are we I've set the clear goal
of a hundred thousand tests a day by the
end of the month and I'm pleased that
the number now is over nineteen thousand
a day we have I was setting out how
we've got four mega labs coming on
stream the first three of those are
already got going and the it's the
cambridge one that will come on stream
at the end of this month and we also
have all of the existing labs within
public health England and the NHS and
some other research institutes that
we're using and as I say this is a
this is a part of the national effort
and one of the things that's happened
since I announced the the goal for the
nation as a whole over the life sciences
industry of a hundred thousand tests a
day by the end of the month is we've had
a huge number of offers of people have
come to us and said well we can turn
this facility which hasn't been a
coronavirus testing facility into a
coronavirus testing facility and
facilities that we didn't know about or
equipment that we didn't know about that
they brought to the task there's the
other thing about the the mega labs that
we're opening and is that many of them
are staffed by volunteers of volunteers
who are super specialists in exactly
what we need and meeting many of them
yesterday it was it was incredibly
inspiring to see what they're doing
because they have they know that this is
vital for the national effort and
they've brought their skills to us to
help everybody get through this because
testing is so important so i i've set
that goal of a hundred thousand we're
working 24/7 to hit it and everybody can
see the daily trajectory which has
almost doubled since since i set it and
we've clearly got a lot of work to do to
to get to a hundred thousand but we are
on track the second question was do you
professor yes
Thank You Hannah oxygen this disease is
unlike anything I've seen in my almost
three decades in medicine it is really
really unusual in that the requirement
for patients who are hospitalized to
have oxygen is very high and sorry to go
back to the hosepipe analogy but if
everyone in a certain area turns on
their sprinkler in the garden at the
same time the water pressure will go
down for a while
and it is a logistic and engineering
challenge to create all those thousands
of an extra intensive care beds that we
have done with ventilators and also
secured the oxygen supply that goes
behind them now I do know that there has
been absolutely enormous logistic work
24/7 behind the scenes to keep hospitals
supplied with oxygen but you're right we
have seen one or two reports of where
something has gone slightly wrong with
an oxygen supply and that's partly about
the stress on the whole engineering
system of a hospital that is required to
produce the oxygen demands for double
the number of ventilators and we have to
learn as we go along and our engineers
have to adapt and you are going to see
these isolated incidents and we'll learn
from them but oxygen supply you're right
to flag it it's unprecedented demand
with this virus you might have been
referring to the challenges that we have
in watford last weekend in the question
I don't know if you have there's more
detail you wanted to ask our story we
spoke to doctors across the country who
said they were concerned by things that
they were being told such as that they
may not be able to give oxygen to
palliative care patients and when we
spoke to BMA you know they said they
were really concerned by those reports
and it's something that the government
should be taking seriously okay so the
the the the truth is that in all the
challenges in oxygen supply that
Professor van tom has just set out in
all cases there has been available
ventilated oxygen to be able to treat
those who need it and in fact we have
currently over 2,000 spare beds with
ventilators so we have spare capacity
and they
fact the spare capacity is currently
going up faster than need so the the
overall capacity is going out faster the
need service pair capacity is increasing
so to anybody listening or watching the
message is very clear which is there is
enough capacity in the NHS to look after
you no matter if you catch it how
serious it gets but it's very important
that we don't allow the spread of the
virus to accelerate because we've got to
keep that demand below the levels of
supply even though as we increase supply
and on the point about whether an
individual patient should be put onto a
ventilator and that is a different
question it's not about the capacity
it's not about the availability of beds
it's about a clinical judgment for each
and every person and that should never
be made on a blanket basis it should
always be made on the basis of advice of
clinicians as to what is in the best
interests of the patient and it's
something that came up I think last time
Ruth and I were on this at this press
conference and we talked about it with
respect to do not resuscitate notices
which are a standard part of any health
care system but there should be that
there is a there is there is there is no
link between the capacity of the NHS and
the needs of an individual because we
have thankfully so far in all
circumstances managed to keep the
available capacity above the demand
curve and the reason we've been able to
do that is because people are following
the social distancing advice and staying
at home and if they weren't that would
be a much more of a challenge so if
anybody needs another motivation as to
why you should stay at home and follow
the social distancing rules it's
precisely because we don't want the
concerns that you raised understandably
in your question to be to become the
reality across the NHS I don't whether
you've got anything else to add
absolutely right secretary
collisions from all sorts of backgrounds
are making those decisions all - all of
the time even when patients are not in
intensive care people are needing oxygen
and clinicians are doing that day in day
out they'll make sure that if a patient
a person at home wherever they are if
they need to have oxygen to issues where
we needed to do that and they will
thanks very much Dave West from the
health service journal I don't I don't
firstly for therefore Secretary of State
we've heard consistently from yourself
and from government about the vital
importance of staying at home to relieve
pressure on the NHS and to save lives
we've also heard that if you do need to
travel to work you should humanly
possible keep going with social
distancing measures and stay two metres
apart from each other and we've been
told since your illness and the Prime
Minister's illness that government is
conducting its business in a way so as
to achieve this as far as humanly
possible yet we've learned that a number
of times in recent days you've continued
to hold meetings yourself in your office
with between 10 and 20 senior officials
and their assistance clearly not able to
observe those rules it's 90 metres apart
and not working from home senior NHS
officials dialing into those meetings
have expressed senior concerns to us
about the example that sets of their
staff and why they will behave and
concerns that they will in turn think
that they should they need to be turning
up to work and it's irresponsible not to
and so are you going to stop holding
those meetings in that way or do you
think that it's impossible for you to
meet those rules and in question - -
Ruth or - Jonathan is a follow up on
Hannah's about the wider healthy you're
watching BBC news we're gonna leave this
Downing Street press briefing the 6
o'clock news is coming up next with
Sophie Rael
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News